feat(bare-metal): add tutorial to boot a custom kernel on EM-RV1 (#2935)
scaleway/docs-content: bare-metal/elastic-metal/reference-content/elastic-metal-rv1-advanced-usage.mdx

---
meta:
  title: Elastic Metal RV1 advanced usage
  description: This page explains some advanced ways to use EM-RV1 servers.
content:
  h1: Elastic Metal RV1 advanced usage
  paragraph: This page explains some advanced ways to use EM-RV1 servers.
tags: elastic-metal server riscv em-rv1
dates:
  validation: 2024-03-15
  posted: 2024-03-15
categories:
  - bare-metal
---

## Boot process

EM-RV1 servers do not support standard UEFI or BIOS boot, therefore the boot

> process might slightly differ from what you are used to on other servers. At

Reviewer: ```suggestion
process might slightly differ from other usual servers. At
```

Author: I just rephrased that to "other servers" as I don't think "usual server" would mean the same to everyone.

boot, the bootloader expects the eMMC to be partitioned as GPT, and will look
for a `boot.itb` file in the first or second partition. The partition that
contains this boot file must be formatted as EXT4.

This `boot.itb` file is in fact a [FIT
Image](https://docs.u-boot.org/en/latest/usage/fit/source_file_format.html)
that must contain the following sections:

  - **kernel**: A Linux kernel image.
  - **fdt**: A [device tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Devicetree).
  - **opensbi**: The SBI as defined by [RISC-V SBI
      specification](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-sbi-doc/).
  - **env**: A text-based environment file that defines the following keys:
      - `usr_bootargs`: Command-line arguments to pass to the kernel.
      - `usr_has_ramdisk`: Set to `1` if we should load the ramdisk from the FIT
        image.
  - **ramdisk** (optional): A ramdisk image.

> The following section will explain in details how to create your own boot FIT image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following section will provide a detailed explanation on how to create your own boot FIT image.
```

## Boot a custom kernel

> In this section, you will build a boot image based off a close-to-mainline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, you will build a boot image based off a close-to-mainline
```

Linux kernel.

<Message type="note">
  Mainline Linux is not fully compatible with EM-RV1 servers yet.
</Message>

<Message type="requirement">

>   - You have an EM-RV1 server with Ubuntu installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Installed an EM-RV1 server with Ubuntu
```

  - You are proficient on Linux systems.
  - You have a few hours available to build a Linux kernel.

> </Message>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

for a `boot.itb` file in the first or second partition. The partition that
contains this boot file must be formatted as EXT4.

This `boot.itb` file is in fact a [FIT
Image](https://docs.u-boot.org/en/latest/usage/fit/source_file_format.html)
that must contain the following sections:

  - **kernel**: A Linux kernel image.
  - **fdt**: A [device tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Devicetree).
  - **opensbi**: The SBI as defined by [RISC-V SBI
      specification](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-sbi-doc/).
  - **env**: A text-based environment file that defines the following keys:
      - `usr_bootargs`: Command-line arguments to pass to the kernel.
      - `usr_has_ramdisk`: Set to `1` if we should load the ramdisk from the FIT
        image.
  - **ramdisk** (optional): A ramdisk image.

The following section will explain in details how to create your own boot FIT image.

## Boot a custom kernel

In this section, you will build a boot image based off a close-to-mainline
Linux kernel.

<Message type="note">
  Mainline Linux is not fully compatible with EM-RV1 servers yet.
</Message>

<Macro id="requirements" />

> <Message type="requirement">

Reviewer 2: Is this redundant ?

Author: I actually don't know, but this is the way it's done in many places:

https://github.com/scaleway/docs-content/blob/ab4ae50353a8a935d32c875f0d134c40d970ea44/compute/instances/how-to/manage-volumes.mdx#L49-L54

I can't check if it renders differently because building just this page already eats up all my RAM.

Author: Got it. It was indeed redundant.
